Is it in our self-interest to being good?[footnote:
word count: 1953
]

#20387090

June 29, 2015

We explore this problem from the perspective of how a rational 
agent would act, and their problem solving method. And as a 
follow up, the diligent reader would notice that there are surely 
many different methods to solving a problem. Some of those 
methods would involve being good, and some not. What do we do 
when it is possible to achieve the same goals through just and 
unjust means? In response to this, we explore the problem through 
an example of an unjust man versus a just man, and how it is 
easier to be good.

The main arguments are drawn from the course textbook[footnote:
Shafer-Landau, R. (2014). The Fundamentals of Ethics. Oxford 
University Press
], with secondary arguments from an artificial intelligent 
textbook[footnote:
Russell, S.J. & Norvig, P. (2010). Artificial Intelligence: A 
Modern Approach. Prentice Hall
], the readings “The Ring of Gyges” and “Collective Action 
Problems”.

  Definition of our. 

We define the term our in the question “is it in our self 
interest to be good?” to mean a rational agent. Being rational is 
a fundamental assumption we make, in the sense that human 
intelligence is plagued with emotional conflicts, resulting in 
irrational decisions. Hence it is in our self-interest to avoid 
acting upon emotional decisions, and avoid its pitfalls by being 
rational. We also define good later on, once we've established a 
framework.

  From a Rational Agent's Perspective

First, let's look at the reasons why it would be in a rational 
agent's self-interest to be good, in to reap better rewards in 
the future, and secondly, why it benefits them more as a whole 
from being good.

  Definition of good.

We're now ready to define what good means, in “is it in our 
self-interest to be good”: being good means not being selfish and 
always maximizing the reward for yourself. Being rational and not 
necessarily picking the most seemingly beneficial action at the 
moment.

  Firstly, why it would be in a rational agent's self-interest to 
  be good, due to future rewards.

From our definition of what it means to be good, it follows that 
we shouldn't be bad (not good), which is being selfish and always 
picking the action that maximizes the current reward. In other 
words, being bad is being always greedy. Let's start with an 
important foundation from the course textbook to build upon: the 
underlying commonalities from different social theories[footnote:
page 215 of The Fundamentals of Ethics
]:

The key to understanding them [social negotiation theories], 
however, lies in the idea that the contractors are, above all, 
rational and self-interested. 

Being self-interested is not the same thing as being selfish. 
Being self-interested is having a strong concern for how you well 
you are faring in life. Being selfish is placing far too much 
importance on your own well-being relative to the interests of 
others. 

What it means is that there are future benefits of being good, at 
a cost of gaining less benefit at-the-moment. That is, we should 
be self-interested instead of being selfish. Being selfish 
maximizes the reward we get now but at a cost in the future. This 
is also seen in the AI textbooks, through the notion of a reward 
function[footnote:
Also known as an utility function.
], measuring how much reward was attained from an action. Our 
self-interest is to choose the action that attains the most 
reward, i.e. the optimal action to take is to take the action 
that maximizes the benefit now, and in the future. And “
[r]epeated experiments show that the greedy agent very seldom 
converges to the optimal policy”[footnote:
pg. 839 AIMA 3rd ed.
]. Essentially, the AI textbooks also agree with the idea from 
the philosophy textbook – the idea that you should be rational 
and self-interested but not selfish. 

  Secondly, why it rewards rational agents more as a group from 
  being good.

In other words, we'll look at how rewards increase if rational 
agents cooperate with each other and be good. It is easy to 
understand that when others have good opinions of you and you 
have the trust of others, this opens doors, and you get a wider 
choice of options to choose from. offers more rewards for the 
collective group than being bad (greedy). We can look at what 
happens when everyone is good, when everyone is good except you, 
when everyone is bad except you, and lastly, when everyone is 
bad. To the diligent reader, this indeed looks like a Prisoner's 
Dilemma. And indeed we will look at Nash Equilibriums. To explore 
this, we'll look at why behaving badly is a bad strategy in the 
form of a collective action problem.

  Collective Action Problem

In the Collective Action Problem reading[footnote:
p. 366 Constellations Volume 7, Number 3, 2000 Ideology and 
Irrationality. 
http://homes.chass.utoronto.ca/~jheath/ideology.pdf Accessed June 
3, 2015
], people seem to behave irrationally because it seems like the 
best action, at a cost to others. This problem looks like the 
Prisoner's Dilemma problem, which we analyze from the rational 
agent perspective. This reading suggests that we are lazy 
individuals who don't want to be the one putting in the effort to 
be good, unless everyone is doing good. And if everyone is doing 
good, then certainly it is going be in our self-interest to sit 
back and reap the fruits of other's labour. So this seems to be a 
catch-22 problem. 

While you can reap rewards by being bad, it is only temporarily 
so. Assuming that people are not fools and stupid (but certainly 
not always rational agents) is quite reasonable, then it's 
reasonable to assume others learn eventually of your tactics, and 
the whole system collapses. There won't be any fruits of labour 
to reap. Everyone being good is an unstable equilibrium, like the 
Prisoner's Dilemma. 

Thus it is in our self-interest to be good and help maintain a 
good, stable equilibrium and cooperate, so that the collective 
benefit is greater than individual greedy-action benefits, which 
essentially the Nash equilibrium conclusion.

We argued these points through analysis of rewards to a rational 
agent, but the keen reader will notice that being bad in a Nash 
Equilibrium is a dominate strategy. This is true. However, the 
focus of this section is (cleverly) regarding the rewards to 
rational agents as a group. Hence it is still a bad strategy. 
Well why should the rational agent care about other rational 
agents? The answer to this is that other rational agents are also 
rational, meaning they know your strategy and so you can't take 
advantage of them.

  Results.

The reader should see that it is in a rational agent's 
self-interest to be good because it is more rewarding, for the 
above two reasons. First, making bad (not good, greedy) decisions 
decreases future expected rewards. Second, rational agents in a 
group forms a Nash Equilibrium, which is inherently unstable, so 
not being good destroys the cooperation with other rational 
agents and results in overall less reward. 

  Archiving Same Goals Through Just vs. Unjust Means 

This section explores the issue of different methods to achieve 
the same goals, but the methods have a preference order in 
goodness. 

Roughly translated, being just translates to being good, and 
unjust means up to no good. A reading which fits nicely here is “
The Ring of Gyges” by Plato[footnote:
“The Ring of Gyges” by Plato - Philosophy Lander.edu 
http://philosophy.lander.edu/intro/articles/gyges-a.pdf Accessed 
June 2, 2015.
], an example of an unjust man vs. a just man, both meeting their 
goals. 

In the reading, it explores a sly, unjust man versus a righteous 
and just man. Both of whom theoretically can achieve the same 
goals but through different methods. A man of the uttermost 
injustice and deceit can live a life as good as a just man 
achieving the same goals through just acts, through perfect 
deceit. Intuition tells us that archiving the same end results 
through deceitful means is certainly worse than archiving it 
through honorable means. And indeed Plato argues for this, as the 
course textbook summarizes it well[footnote:
page 108 of The Fundamentals of Ethics
].

Certainly many immoral people are deeply troubled and unhappy. 
But others are able to sleep well at night, take pride in a job 
well done (assassination, theft, betrayal), and find friends 
within a network of like-minded associates. The bad guys 
sometimes get away with it, having a lot of fun in the meantime, 
and never regret the harm they have caused.

Certainly based on pure accomplishments, the two man are the 
same, since both can accomplish their desired goal through just 
or unjust means. But the primary difference is that there is a 
chance for the dishonest man to get caught and (heavily) 
penalized. And sure, certainly the bad guys sometimes get away 
with it. A major assumption here is that they can get away with 
it. 

Let's break the argument into two pieces: suppose he fails 
sometimes in lying, and suppose he never fails in lying. 

  He might fail at deceit.

This is the more realistic argument. Realistically speaking, the 
underlying assumption is unattainable. No man can deceive the 
entire life from the moment they were born. With such an 
outrageous assumption, we might as well assume he was born with 
everything he could ever want in life. Accomplishing the same 
goal but taking the unjust method to do it translates to taking 
more risk, but at a chance to gain higher reward. 

But here is the kicker: there is no difference in the reward. We 
had assumed the two man achieved the same goal but with different 
means. Then obviously it makes no sense to pick the riskier path. 
All the deceitful man has done is save some time and effort. 
Which may be valuable, but at a heavy price if caught.

  He never fails at deceit.

Even if we make the (unlikely) assumption the unjust man is 
capable of maintaining his composure at all times and not fall 
out of character, it still doesn't make sense why to take the 
riskier path as it leads to the same rewards. All he has done is 
save some time and effort. Seems that this assumption is quite 
difficult to accomplish (if not impossible) for the average 
layman. Sure, there may exist those of us that are deceptive 
enough to carry this out, but they mostly exist for the sake of 
argument. It is likely the assumption is a fallacy in itself, but 
cannot be proved.

  Results.

A lot of the arguments explored here are suppositions, and not as 
solid in logic analysis as from the rational agent perspective. 
But nevertheless, the fundamental argument in this section is to 
show that it's much easier to maintain a righteous and just 
composure than a deceitful and unjust one, as in most people find 
it difficult to maintain a deceitful composure and accept its 
risks. Consequently, if we act just, then it is in our 
self-interest to be good.

  Conclusion

We've now explored this problem from the perspective of how a 
rational agent would act, and their problem solving method. It is 
in a rational agent's self-interest to be good because it is more 
rewarding, because making bad (not good, greedy) decisions 
decreases future expected rewards, and not being good destroys 
the cooperation with other rational agents and results in overall 
less reward. 

And we've followed up on what do we do when there are many 
different methods to solving a problem and some involve being 
good and some not. It seems that the underlying assumption is 
reasonably invalid, and even if it was true, there isn't much to 
be gained.

The common result from the analysis suggest being good is an 
optimal choice. 

